---
layout: post
title: Design-based Unbiasedness
author: Bryce Frank
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
  src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.5/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config">
  MathJax.Hub.Config({
    extensions: [
      "MathMenu.js",
      "MathZoom.js",
      "AssistiveMML.js",
      "a11y/accessibility-menu.js"
    ],
    jax: ["input/TeX", "output/CommonHTML"],
    TeX: {
      extensions: [
        "AMSmath.js",
        "AMSsymbols.js",
        "noErrors.js",
        "noUndefined.js",
      ]
    }
  });
</script>

Many forest inventories rely on design-based inference to produce estimates of population totals. The main tenent of design-based inference is the use of a
randomization process to select samples from the population. We
can leverage this randomization process to construct estimators
of population parameters. For this post, we will consider the
population total:

$$
\tau = \sum_{i=1}^{N} y_i
$$

our target parameter. Note that $$N$$ represents the population
size and $$y_i$$ represents the observation of the $$i$$th
population unit. We can represent this population with the grid
below, where each grid cell is a population unit, and each
observation (i.e. the $$y_i$$) is indicated by a number. Examine the individual population values by
hovering your mouse over the population unit. Yellower colors indicate high values, and cooler
colors indicate lower values.

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://d3js.org/d3.v5.js"></script>
<script src="https://d3js.org/d3-scale-chromatic.v0.3.min.js"></script>
<div id="gridBody1" align="center"></div>
<script src="/scripts/grid1.js"></script>

Adding up the $$N = 36$$ values we can determine that $$\tau = 135$$. However, in nearly all real
sampling problems $$\tau$$ will be unknown.

### Sampling Designs and Estimators

As samplers, our objective is to construct an estimate of
$$\tau$$ using only a limited number of observations. In
design-based inference we do so by leveraging the process of
randomization when selecting a sample from our population. This
process of randomization ultimately allows us to establish
important properties of a given estimator, such as unbiasedness.

A very common estimator available to us is the Horvitz-Thompson
estimator, which relies on knowledge of the inclusion probability
of each population unit. The inclusion probability $$\pi_i$$ is
the probability a population unit is selected into a sample. The
Horvitz-Thompson estimator is:

$$
\hat{\tau} = \sum_{i=1}^{N} \frac{y_i}{\pi_i}
$$

The inclusion probabilities are values set in advance by the
specification of a sampling design. Many sampling
designs are available, and one common one is simple random
sapling without replacement (SRSWoR).

SRSWoR begins by randomly selecting an initial population unit,
where all population units have an equal probability of
selection. Then, at the second stage, the previously sampled unit
is not replaced, and the remaining population units have an equal
probability of selection. This process continues until $$n$$ units
have been selected. <a
href="https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2086983/inclusion-probability-in-simple-random-sampling-srs-without-replacement"
target = "_blank">It can be shown</a> that for all units, such a process will result in an inclusion
probability of $$\pi_i = \frac{n}{N}$$ for all units.

### Establishing Unbiasedness

The Horvitz-Thompson estimator has long been known to be an
unbiased estimator of the population total. That is, the
expectation of the estimator, taken over all possible samples, is
equal the the population total:

$$
E_{D}[\hat{\tau}] = \tau
$$

where the subscript $$D$$ refers to the expectation taken over all
possible samples (i.e. it is a function of the sampling design).

In this case, the expectation is really just a summation over all
possible realizations of the estimator:

$$
E_{D}[\hat{\tau}] = \frac{1}{S} \sum_{j=1}^{S}\hat{\tau}_j
$$

where $$S$$ represents the total number of possible samples. Note
that any given *sample* (i.e. any *set* of *population units*
selected for sampling) is just as likely to get selected as any
other. Unfortunately, for even modest sized
populations, $$S$$ becomes a very large number. For the purposes
of illustration we will take advantage of a Monte-Carlo
simulation to visualize the unbiasedness of the HT estimator.

$$
E_{D}[\hat{\tau}] \approx \frac{1}{M} \sum_{j=1}^{M}\hat{\tau}_j
$$

where $$M$$ is sufficiently large.

### Visualizing Unbiasedness

The following visualization displays a population of $$N=36$$
population units, represented by grid cells. The population
values are indicated by the grid cell color. Hover your mouse
over a particular grid cell to see the actual value. On the right
is a figure that will demonstrate the unbiasedness of the HT
estimator once the simulation begins.

<div id="figure2" align="center">
  <div id="gridBody2"></div>
  <div id="estBody"></div>
  <div id="option">
    <button id="startButton" type="button">Start</button>
  </div>
</div>
<script src="/scripts/grid2.js"></src>
<script src="/scripts/tau_sim.js"></src>